Interview with Dr. W. W. Rostow, aide to
Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, May 2, 1986, LBJ
Library. Testing, one, two, three.
Actually, having this close is pretty, it would be
really close from the room. All
right. In U.S. News and World Report, you stated
that Hanoi built its policy on the judgment that
the U.S. could not stand a long, indecisive war.
and that Washington built its policy on faith in
the reality of South Vietnamese and Southeast
Asian nationalism. And I'm curious what faith
you're speaking of, and I would like this sort of in
two parts. In 1961, when President Kennedy
increased the number of advisors, and then in
1965, when we committed ground forces. What's
your question? You speak that we built our policy
on the faith in the reality of South Vietnamese and
Southeast Asian nationalism. That's correct.
And I'm curious what nationalism you speak of. I'm
talking about the nationalism of the South
Vietnamese, who wanted a destiny independent of
Hanoi. That was the central question that
President Kennedy asked me to investigate, as I
reported, when I went out with General Taylor. And
before he made up his mind, he committed himself to
the defense of South Vietnam under the Southeast
Asian Treaty. He explored all the evidence he
could that the South Vietnamese did not wish to go
with the North. And as I say, that was the central
question he asked me, aside from being number two
in that mission, to investigate. And I describe
how I did it in the Diffusion of Power, and I
recorded it here. But he based his his policy on the
answer, as indeed did President Johnson. And
there's no doubt that there was, and is to this day,
a very strong South Vietnamese nationalism.
These people did not wish to go under the North, and
they still haven't accepted rule from the North.
The North has been ruling the South through a
carpetbagger administration. There's a
convention. The conventional wisdom in a number
of writers is that nationalism was on the side of
the and that there was no South Vietnamese
nationalism. That's just not true. I know there's
a difference because we've discussed the Chinese
influence and the Indian influence on the South
and the Chinese influence on the North and how
there's really two different people almost.
Well, it's three different people, and that's one
of the great illusions. They have the same
language, but there's a delta. There's central
Vietnam from which both Ho Chi Minh and Jim came,
and then there's the Red River Valley people. And
they have, they never, you know, had a really truly
united existence, and they have very distinct
regionalized. And the history of the whole
post-colonial period has tragically, instead of
bringing them together,
heightened those tensions which are deep in their
history. Well, I have another question with that.
When I think of nationalism, I think of unity of a
people that are willing to work towards a goal. And
in South Vietnam, you find a people that are, you
know, you have a Catholic leader at first, leading
Buddhists. And as you reported in your book, in
fact, in your report, the Rostow-Taylor report,
you said that some of the people really just didn't
care who ruled them, they just wanted to be left
alone and grow their rice. Well, the point about it
is you've got to understand what a little
post-colonial country is. They wanted to—in most
developing countries, which have not had a long
history of national experience, you will find
that the ties of clan, tribe in Africa, of region
are much stronger than the ties of nation, which
are rather abstract. What bound these people
right to the end, and right down to the present
time, is they did not wish to be run by the North. And
they also
were united in an extraordinary way
for country at that stage in its history in a desire
to be independent of the North politically, and
they fought. It used to shock students when I used
to sit and talk with them about this, and it'll
shock you no doubt, but they were much more united
in their struggle against the North than we were
against the British in the War of Independence.
Maybe one-third of the Americans were for
independence, one-third were pro-British, The
third were out to make a fast buck selling stuff to
the Army or out to lunch. These people, when they
went into the Army, there was no one-year hitch.
They'd be carried out in a plastic bag or wounded.
And at the time of Tet, if you passed out a million
guns, he knew which way they were going to shoot. He
wasn't worried. That was not the problem. Well, if
I could play devil's advocate here for a second.
Battle of Atpak in January 1963. The Arvin clearly
outnumbered the VC, and yet they threw their guns
down and they ran. There were occasions when they
were outflanked or they ran, but on the whole they
were very uneven. They were a much more advanced
army— Than we give them credit for? —than the
Koreans were at the equivalent period. We
couldn't do what we did in Korea. It might have been
in some way better, but they were much better
organized and much more competent. They had, we
just integrated the units. And some Korea, it was
very good for the Korean training, but it was not
good for institutionally.
These people had their separate units, and there
was a wide range of competence in those units.
I remember when General Abrams came back after
Tet, he went through all the major units and, you
know, gave them, like a professor, he gave them the
grades. And there was a considerable range. And,
you know, they had some units who, the first
division, I think, was one of the, it was as good as
any American division. Others were mediocre. And
the quality of the leadership, but you see, you've
got to understand what a little post-colonial
country's like. It takes time. I mean, your
question, you see, revealed that you hadn't given
enough thought. My notion of nationalism is they
want a country. I mean, they're all united around a
common purpose. Well, they weren't. They had much
more unity, as I say, than we did at an equivalent
time in our history. But they had all sorts of
divisions. And the one thing that overwhelmingly
united them was that they didn't want to be run from
the North. But it went on. I'll tell you one. You
want to go back, if you're interested in learning
about this and not simply repeating cliches and
being devil's advocate. Study sometime the
elections of 1967.
And a very good team was sent out by the president
and the press. And these people, I was there when
they reported, and they were all people with an
independent constituency. That is to say, they
were not beholden to the president at all. A number
of them were against his policy.
whatever.
But they threw themselves very seriously into
that election, very moving. So they were moving
forward, and if we hadn't walked out on them,
they'd be well on their way to being—they have the
basic vitality of the South Koreans, and they
would have made an economic and social success in
the place.
Okay.
Was Ho Chi Minh a communist or a nationalist, in
your opinion? He was proud to be a communist, very
proud to be a communist. He was in the Comintern
apparatus since the First World War, and he was the
first to tell you he's a communist. Of course he's a
communist. That doesn't mean he wasn't a
nationalist also, to some extent. But he was part
of the—they all have strands of nationalism in
them. But yes, he was a professional who rose up to
be head of the Vietnamese Communist Party by
knocking off some of his opposition members. But,
you know, there's no question he worked in Moscow.
He was in the commentary and all the rest of it.
Okay. Could we have recognized him in 1945,
though, when he declared independence? He had a
constitution based after ours. He offered us the
use of Cameron Bay to put an American military base
in. Who said that? That was in the Pentagon Papers,
I believe. I don't remember ever reading that, and
I don't believe he would do that. He couldn't do
that and maintain his relations with China and
Russia. He might have done it during the war,
perhaps, or something like that. But the point
about it is, he was a thoroughly professional
communist and his pattern of action is just like
the communists in Nicaragua or Cuba or China what
was the pattern to organize a popular front and
with all kinds of people to tell the peasants you
want to get your land to work with the Catholic
Church in opposition with the unions until he had
power Then, with the hardcore communists, he
cleaned out the unions. He cleaned out the church.
He didn't give the people a land. He put them in
collective farms. Very pedestrian exercise in
the takeover of power, right by the book. And you do
know, by this time, if you don't see it, I don't know
when you're ever going to learn about it. But this
is what's been repeated over and over again. Now,
the question is, if China had decided that it was
not going into
with the Soviet Union. He might have tried to make,
I think, separate terms with the United States,
but China decided, for very good reasons, from a
communist point of view, that they would be
dishonest,
faithless to their own duty to history. Why?
Because it's written into communist doctrine out
of the experience of the Soviets. Communist Party
came to power as a counter-revolution in the midst
of the confusions of war. The confusions and
flexibility, if you like, revolutionary
potential of a war
is written into the training of every good
communist as a time of opportunity. And when Mao
looked at the situation in Asia, what did he see? He
saw a very weak South Korea and America that had
pulled its forces out. He looked at Taiwan, a
defeated dynasty as in the past, Chinese history,
had gone to Formosa and was having very grave
trouble with the people on Formosa. It was
palpable. There was a guerrilla set up in the
Philippines operating communists.
there was a communist party and there was fighting
in Malaysia in Burma also it turned out in
Indonesia and the Japanese occupation had
destroyed the foundations for colonialism in
Asia any good communist would say this is a great
historical opportunity to move forward now if we
tie up with the Americans we have to we can't go into
conduct guerrilla wars all over Asia because
these are strategically going to be at the expense
of the Americans.
And therefore, it's proper for us to join the one
major country that shares our interest in the
success of making the most of this period of
dishevelment in Asia for our purposes. And that's
what happened. They debated it in China, but they
decided to lean to one side, even though Mao's
relations with Stalin had been, and with Moscow
generally, had been very poor. But at a time like
that, his overriding duty was to make the most of
this post-war period, and they tried. And they had
guerrilla wars operating not only in Indochina,
but the Philippines, Burma,
From their point of view, I find it wholly
understandable.
Who controlled the fighting of the war, LBJ or the
military?
You really haven't read much, have you? Yes, sir, I
have. What answer did you get from your reading? I
would say that LBJ did. In what sense? Well, he
picked all the spots for the bombing. We've had
pilots come into our, veterans come into our class
and give lectures. And there's one, in fact, said
that if you went on a bombing mission, but along the
way you saw a VC battalion or something like that,
you couldn't stop and immediately go to that
fighting. You had to call back and then that person
would have to call back, and so on and so forth. And
then we've also discussed how there was no supreme
commander in Vietnam, that Arvin had their own
commanders. We had our own commander, General
Westmoreland, and he was under the admiral in
Hawaii, who was under President Johnson. No, he
was under the Joint Chiefs. No, the point about it
is it's quite right that President Johnson had
made a number of very fundamental decisions. The
first was that which I disagreed, but his decision
was that we would fight the war basically on the
ground inside the boundary of Vietnam. That is to
say, we wouldn't go into the Laos corridors on the
ground where I wanted to go, for example. Or we
wouldn't go into North Vietnam on the ground.
Secondly, he controlled, and that's general
strategy in the war, he did control. Two, he
controlled the targets around Hanoi. which were
settled at the Tuesday lunch, and what he had was a
set of questions. The question was, one, what is
the target and its military meaning? What
advantages do you get from hitting the target?
Two, how many men would we lose and how many plans?
Three, what would be likely civilian casualties?
Four, what are the possibilities of hitting a
foreign ship or something? And he would, the
target list around Hanoi would come to him. He did
not interfere for good or ill. He did not interfere
with the use of air power inside Vietnam or in the
Panhandle or in the Laos Carriers.
But the broad strategy of how the war would be
fought and where it would be fought, the orders of
magnitude of men that we would put in there, and the
equipment, and the targets around Hanoi. These he
kept under personal control. Otherwise, I'd say
Westmoreland really had a quite free hand within
that broad strategy. But the real operative
center for military decision, except for those
three exceptions, was the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Did you agree with search and destroy? Did you
think that was the way to use our ground forces in
Vietnam? That wasn't the only way we did use our
ground forces. The ground forces were much more
complex. See, this was a three-level war. It was a
general, it was a war of conventional forces
without a fixed front against the North
Vietnamese.
It was a war against the main force, VC units. It was
a quite different kind of war. And then there were
the, the, the, what you call authentic guerrilla
operations, which are quite different now. And
the proportions of those three elements changed
through time.
And
it ended up being with the VC washed out after Tet.
Main force units, very weak. And it was mainly a
North, and by the big battle of 72. It was a, a North
Vietnamese war against the, without a fixed
front, conventional war. 61, I'd say it was
overwhelmingly a guerrilla war. And so you've got
to track all three elements into it, and search and
destroy is a, it's, it's a very, let me give you an
example, different kinds of operations.
When we began to get some forces on the ground,
we went into some base areas where we'd never been
before, which we didn't have the power to
penetrate in an effective way. We began to do that
in 66, 67. And
what you would do is to go in there and engage the
forces and go to the bases and try to capture
documents and do all that kind of thing. That's one
kind of operation. Another kind of operation It
would be quite different. It would be when
the North Vietnamese came across the border near
Cambodia, for example. Those are big units, and
you knew that they might come to Dalat, or they
might come to An Loc, or they might come to any
number of places along there, Loc Ninh. And you
would preempt them. You'd get helicopters and
you'd go in and engage them and rough them up enough
so that they'd have to go back and re-equip and wait
for new men or something. That would be a
preemptive operation.
Under what's called search and destroy, there's a
very wide range of different kind of operations.
My basic view and difference of policy was that I
felt that fighting the war from the inside was
going to be very slow and costly for the people of
Southeast Asia, our lives, for ourselves,
American people, the world. That the war depended
upon the flow of men and supplies from North
Vietnam. The air power could impose a tax on that
flow, but not interdicted. But it could be
interdicted on the ground. two beefed-up U.S.
divisions with plenty of air support. And that's
what I wanted to do.
You discussed that the air attacks diverted
83,000 MVA troops and how it afflicted attrition
and all this, and yet the North Vietnamese and the
VC matched every one of our troop increases, and
they just kept coming. They kept the pressure upon
us. So in hindsight, do you believe the bombing was
effective as you first believed? Well, I did never
believe that the bombing itself was going to be
decisive. That's why I just told you something.
You didn't seem to take it in. I said what I wanted to
do was to put forces on the ground because the flow
of supplies and the problem of handling those
supplies
was something
where air power could impose attacks, but it
couldn't stop them. Now, you got that? Yes, sir.
All right. And, uh, I thought it was, you know, not
sufficient. And, uh, uh, the,
uh, so that I, that's why I did not think that air
power could be used decisively and that, but that
ground forces could be used decisively by going
into Laos on the ground and, and interacting with
Ho Chi Minh trails, which is not one trail, it's an
area. and I thought that could be done and should
have been done.
Besides, I had other disagreements with the way
air power was used. I thought it was used very well
at—what's
that base? Denae? No, no, no, during Tet
Offensive, that place up near the border. What's
the name of the very famous place? Quezon? Quezon.
It was used very well under General Mollmeyer. We
began to have I really worked out in that period the
first really good use, I mean effective use, of the
tactical air in the Laos corridors in southern
North Vietnam. But it was very hard to do because
the flow of supplies was limited. So I don't think
air power was used maximally, but a maximum use of
it couldn't have been decisive, in my judgment,
had it acted on the ground. But your other
assumption is they didn't—it wasn't a question of
their matching. What they did in North Vietnam was
to—what they saw was the gradual attenuation, 66,
67, 68, 69, of the South Vietnamese forces And they
put in in 72 a truly maximum effort at that time,
after we had withdrawn our ground forces. And they
were beaten, a fact which no one ever seems to
mention anymore. And that's how we got the truth.
And I think without Watergate, they were lived by
that truth. Did you read the account of the
victorious North Vietnamese general in 75, of why
they went in in 75? Yes, sir, I was going to ask you
that. Well, you fellas don't do any homework. You
just come up with the same old cliches that all the
kids had in the 60s, and you really ought to learn
more. You're not in the 60s. You're a new
generation. I'm sorry, I read that in your, how you
were irritated by certain questions being asked.
I'm not irritated by them. I'm just—no, but, you
know, I don't—I spent more time with students, but
I'm just—what makes me sad, generally going
around the country, when I talk to students, they
don't come up with the same old—they want to know
what happened.
And I spent, you know, these talks with students,
never less than three, usually five or six Here is
the document you ought to get, our great spring
victory in account of the liberation of South
Vietnam by General Van Tien Dung, chief of staff of
the Vietnam People's Army. This is his account of
the circumstances that led him to go in. It's
summarized in the New York Times of April 26, 1976.
And all I'm going to do now is—but he gives a very
vivid account of the effects of the of the cuts of
aid to the Vietnamese—South Vietnamese forces,
the Congress, and all the rest of it. Well, I
remember you were writing how the South
Vietnamese economy in 1972 was equitable to South
Korea in the 60s. No, not the 60s. Oh, no, no, the 60s
was the takeoff period in South Vietnam—end
period. It was a time of peace, and they'd had time
What I'm saying is that they built up, during the
war, certain of the elements of what I call the
preconditions for takeoff. One education, which
is very, very important. They only had one
institute of higher—well, they had no institute
of higher learning in the South, under the French.
The only university was Hanoi, and they built this
series of universities, technical schools, very
high degree of literacy. Secondly, agriculture.
They began to bring in chemical fertilizers, some
of the new seeds, and an American woman in aid
brought in the chicken revolution.
And then we sent out Stanford Research Institute
to help them design a land reform program, which
was instituted, and the tube got it through. It was
a very hard thing to do. members of the Senate were
mainly landlords. But they didn't have a big
feudal agriculture, but they did have some. And so
they had, then they had the other thing, a big
infrastructure improvement. So during the war,
certain fundamental things were happening,
which at a time of peace, might have permitted
them, it might have, would have permitted them to
go into takeoff, but you couldn't do it with the war
going on. But wasn't all that not so much due to the
South Vietnamese government, but more to just
Americans just pumping money into the economy? If
you don't have people who can do it, you're pushing
on a string.
Do you ever think for a moment of how the South
Vietnamese are doing in the United States? Do you
see how many are winning science prizes,
valedictorians, or going to college? You know,
one of the things that really worries me about
people, if we decided that we wanted to give up on
them for whatever reasons we had a right to, and
people will differ and argue about it for a long
time, but you don't seem to realize what lies
behind your questions. A systematic picture
which tends to blame their defeat on the
Vietnamese. They don't have nationalisms. They
ran away at some battle.
They didn't do anything for themselves. All they
did was get American money. You've got a whole set
of biases. I don't think you've ever examined
them. Did you ever ask yourself what your general
assumption is or your own view? Your questions are
all—I've lived through this kind of questioning,
and I don't mind it at all. I'm not annoyed. But I
don't think your questions at all reflect any
reading of what I've written about it, which is all
right if you want to just try out your cliché
questions on these poor bastards of South
Vietnamese who deserved everything they got,
which is your attitude and the basis for your
questions. That's all right. But one of the most
fundamental things in social science and
history, if you're ever going to do it, is to be
conscious of your own biases. And if you look in the
back of this book, which I urge you to look at
sometime, you'll find that I stated my own view of
the U.S. national interest. Why? Because it, your
assumptions control the questions you ask. What
data you regard as relevant, what data you regard
as irrelevant. And I don't sense that you've
really given this any self-conscious thought and
questioned yourself. After all, you're a new
generation. And I don't know whether you're aware
that President Carter and President Reagan have
reaffirmed the relevance of the Southeast Asia
Treaty to Thailand. Southeast Asia has not gone
away. I think there's a fair chance there won't be a
war out there. But, you know, it's in your lifetime
that this place is still alive, and you've got to
make up your mind as to its meaning. And I don't
think you'll ever come to an understanding of
that. unless you ask yourself, where did I get my
ideas? What do I think? Where have I picked this up?
Is that right?
And, well, carry on. Go ahead with your questions.
But they're an extraordinarily systematic set of
questions, but they have nothing to do with
anything I've ever written. Carry on. What
pacification programs do you believe were
successful and which were failures, and why? I
don't think that you, in a pacification program,
I'm speaking of Phoenix, Hess, the PRU teams.
Well, I don't really know enough about them, but
what I do know is two things. One, what you call
pacification was a very uneven process in
different parts of the country, and it depended a
lot on the local people, the quality of
leadership, the quality of some of the advisors.
Two, I think that the overall picture that I have in
here is pretty accurate, the statistical
picture. Well, I remember you were writing about
how you thought pacification was doing a good job
and was successful, but— But what? I don't
remember you mentioning any specific programs.
You mentioned how— Well, that's what I'm saying
now. What I'm saying is that this chart here of
population status in South Vietnam I think is
pretty fair, you know, accurate. Why do I think so?
Because in the periods where we know things went
bad, take 1965,
these data show quite clearly a gain in the VC area
of control. In this area of slow improvement in
1966,
It leveled off here. We know that about this
period, they began to come into the north, and it
slowed up our progress. We know there was a dip in
Tet, much less than we thought at first, but there
was a dip in Tet. And we know that in the course of 68
to 69, they got badly rolled up, and their own
evidence and everyone else's view, so that they
were confined in this period pretty much to the the
peripheral frontier. So I regard this—I think
anybody who thinks he can measure that kind of
thing in forty-odd provinces with great accuracy
is kidding himself. On the other hand, if
you take this, and if you can see that when it goes
bad, you know, it's reflected And when things are
going better, it's reflected. When it goes bad,
it's reflected. In this period, when the VC were
essentially washed out, it rolls up. Now, even
then, I wouldn't believe this measure by itself.
You've got to take everything that's
quantitative, here's the ratio of enemy losses to
ours, and see if it fits with everything else and if
it fits with the qualitative evidence. Now, we had
some of the ablest young men in our country Foreign
service officers, AID officers, CIA officers,
out in these villages, asked to read their
reports. And if you read enough of them, you know,
the picture would be very uneven, but you'd get a
sense of what, of which way it was moving. And I
think that's about the best you can do in a war of
that kind, without a fixed front. Now, a fixed
front, you see it visually, like a football game.
But this was not that kind of war. It did not have a
fixed front. all manner of quantitative and
non-quantitative evidence to get a feel for which
way it's drifting, and I think that picture is
pretty accurate.
Did journalists use their influence to get
Americans against the war effort, or in general,
did the media affect the outcome of the war?
The outcome of the war is very hard. I think that the
reporting on the whole was not very good. I think it
was partly not very good for understandable
reasons. A lot of the people that were assigned out
there had never dealt with a developing country
before. A lot of them never really got outside the
Caravelle Hotel much. When they did, they'd much
rather go with a US unit than a South Vietnamese
unit. And for good reason, they spoke the language
and it was safer. And I don't hold that against
them. The big thing they did, of course, was
grossly to misinterpret Tet and misreport it. On
the other hand, I don't think they deserve
Well, let me put it. I think
the media earned that. You shouldn't expect them
to report a war very well. A war is a very hard thing
to report. It's an emotional thing. And in
a democracy, virtually all wars are going to be
very, very divisive. This Revolutionary War was
terribly divisive. The War of 1812 New England
people were marching on Washington, trying to get
out of the Union. From Hartford, the Mexican War
was extremely divisive, regionally. Civil War,
of course. The Spanish-American War was very
divisive. First World War was divisive. And we
didn't get into the second. We were so divided that
the only reason we got into the Second World War is
we got attacked at Pearl Harbor. The Germans
declared And, you know, in the Korean War, Mr.
Truman ended up with lower polls than Mr. Nixon
when he left the White House. So war is a dreadful
thing. And in a democracy, I'd expect it,
especially if it runs, if it's all protracted,
that it would be divisive.
So I'm not inclined to blame the press
excessively. I think they did a bad job and had some
considerable influence on the view of Tet, but I
think that President Johnson and our
administration didn't explain before the event
as much as we should have about Tet, which we knew
was coming. So, I mean, it's part of it, but I don't
want to produce a, you know, I don't believe that
somehow the press should be made a scapegoat uh did
the what was the role of the anti-war movement did
that affect decision making as far as you want to
keep your popularity up possibly and if you see
these hundreds of thousands of kids protesting in
front of the tv camera and then you're sitting down
at your 5 30 dinner and then you see this too and then
that makes you think did the anti-war movement
possibly affect decision making as far as maybe
Let's speak of Tet. Maybe after Tet, General
Westmoreland requested 206,000 more troops, and
he got, I believe, 50,000 or 80,000 more. Well, he
didn't get more troops. First, because he didn't
have M-16s, it turned out. And I don't know how
that- and
it's a very amusing story, in a way, because Chew
mobilized a whole 150,000 or whatever it was
there. And the president said, well, if it was a
choice between giving them 16 South Vietnamese
and Americans, I know which way it was going. Also,
there were some financial considerations. And
also, by the time they came around to make the
decision, the president made the decision before
it got into the newspapers, it was palpable that
She was, the South Vietnamese, well, had been a
real military victory on our side. There was some
ambiguity until we could establish, especially,
it took a little while to establish what we'd lost
in the countryside. And it turned out we didn't
lose anything because they were out of the
countryside and South Vietnamese were out of the
countryside and the people were just growing rice
there. But in any case, what was your question
again? Did the war or the anti-war movement? The
anti-war movement, I would say it's a hard
question. It did not affect any of the basic
decisions because, see right down to Tet, 60% of
the people defined themselves as hawks.
President Johnson was much more worried about the
hawks than he was about the doves. And what
actually weakened the war effort was the
defection of the hawks on their
misinterpretation of Tet. rather than the rise of
the Doves. But the reason I'm hesitant is that the
overall decisions, I'd say no.
But as far as President Johnson is concerned,
decisions in the war are concerned.
But as for individual
people in the administration, I cannot vouch for
their effects on individuals. had no effect on me.
You talked about a lot how— Let me tell you why. I had
thought I was luckier than most, in a peculiar
sense, if I was going to get involved in this.
Because in the 1950s,
after I'd done a study of the Soviet Union that
turned out to be quite useful at the time of
Stalin's The government asked me to do a study of
China and Asia. And I said, well, I'd prove this
could be done usefully, and let's get somebody
else to do it. Max Milliken and I had set up this
Center for International Studies at MIT, but no
one would touch it because of McCarthy and all
that. And so they came back to me, and my wife, who
was very wise, suggested it be a good thing to do,
and I did it. And so I had a chance in tranquility to
look very far back and very far forward. and wrote
two books, one called Prospects for Communist
China and another American Policy in Asia. So this
whole array of issues that we were thrust into in
the Kennedy administration
were familiar to me, and I had a chance to quietly to
think it through. for a lot of people, they got hit
like a blindside block, and they'd thought about
arms control, or developing areas, or reform of
NATO, or education, or civil rights, or whatever,
all those. But very few had given much thought to
the strategic problems of Asia, or the future of
Asia. And in that sense, I was lucky, and I'd come to
serious conclusions, as I say, and in fact publish
them with no mystery about my view. So that when,
you know, the confusions and pressures of the war
and debates arose, I knew what I thought and why. In
that sense, more at peace than many of my
colleagues who were very much, and
understandably, torn up by all this. You
mentioned McCarthy and the Red Scare. Did a lot of
good people get taken out of the State Department
because of that, in your opinion, especially
possibly Southeast Asian experts? Because a lot
of people believe that we should have recognized
mainland China by, say, 1955, 1956, that
recognizing Taiwan as the leader of the great
nation of that size was a mistake.
I don't think it had anything to do with anybody in
the State Department. Well, they've just said
that a lot of people just did not know a lot about
Vietnam. I know. I know that people say a lot of
things, but there are a lot of people that did know a
lot about Vietnam. Well, our problem was not that
we didn't know a lot about Vietnam. We know a great
deal. Okay. You mentioned that you all felt that
Tet was about to happen, and I remember reading how
you said you were You'd wish you had asked
President Johnson to speak more about it in the
State of the Union Address. Why, then, was the
716th Military Police Battalion the only
American unit in Saigon attacked? We had a
tremendous—we'd pulled back a couple of
divisions around Saigon. They were wonderfully
prepared for Tet. The U.S. forces were absolutely
geared up for Tet. Well, we had a man who was in the
716th, and he was in Saigon. Why don't you go and you
read the evidence on it? For goodness sakes,
I mean, you get somebody to come in and you get one
detainee. Did you ever read Westmoreland's
cables to President Johnson before Tet? Do you
know what President Johnson told his cabinet
before Tet? Well, I knew he knew it was going to
happen and that he wanted to get everybody
prepared and that Westmoreland was acting to get
his forces ready for him. And he did get them ready,
and he called off the American forces, had the
leave canceled. they were pulled back around
Saigon. And, you know, there's a vast amount of
evidence on this. Okay. What a mistake. You know,
if you have some guy who says something, then you
better say, well, you know, the war's very, if
you're aware in one place in the war, that's a very
important place in the war. But it doesn't mean
that A guy who's in some unit really knows where the
other units are, what orders his commander's
issued. And those are things that can be found out
and can be checked.